[Final project] LEL: LaTeX equation to LLVM (#626)
sampsyo/cs6120: content/blog/2025-12-14-lel-final-project.md

+++
title = "LaTeX Equation Language (LEL): LaTeX equation to LLVM"

[extra]
latex = false
bio = """
Ruolin Ye is a student in Advanced Compilers.
"""

[[extra.authors]]
name = "Ruolin Ye"
+++

# Intro
LaTeX is a common language for writing professional documents like academic papers. In the past, I have worked on many research projects that involve implementing mathematical equations. It’s natural to think of a tool that converts the LaTeX formatted equations into usable code directly and allows the generated code to connect with other developing technologies.

# Problem Statement
This project asks: *can we automatically turn real LaTeX equations into executable code via a small compiler?*  
I build a pipeline that:

> - normalizes LaTeX math from real sources (using MiTeX),

Reviewer: Please include a link to MiTeX, at least once.

- parses a LaTex Equation Language (LEL) supporting arithmetic, conditionals, and function calls, and
- compiles each accepted equation to LLVM IR and checks it against a reference evaluator.

By design, LEL only targets **scalar** expressions with simple function headers (`name(args) = expr`), and explicitly does *not* attempt to handle the full complexity of LaTeX: integrals, matrices, sums/products, asymptotic notation, or rich macro systems are all out of scope for this first prototype.

# Implementation
I will detail the implementation in this section. I will first introduce the datasets I use, explain the components and compare what I proposed vs. what's actually implemented, and then detail how I implemented each component.

> My code is open sourced at [link](https://github.com/YoruCathy/cs6120_final_project).

Reviewer: A slightly nicer way to link things:
```suggestion
My code is [open source on GitHub](https://github.com/YoruCathy/cs6120_final_project).
```

> ## Dataset

Reviewer: Maybe add a sentence here with an overview of the three datasets, and describing what you needed them for? (Namely, to validate your compiler's coverage of common LaTeX math constructs.)

### A tiny hand-written set
A curated suite of 24 hand-written LEL functions covering arithmetic, powers, fractions, zero-argument functions, conditional expressions, and calls. 
### Hugging face latex-formulas dataset 

> `latex-formulas` is a large-scale dataset of images paired with corresponding LaTeX equations. I downloaded the cleaned Parquet shards from the Hugging Face [dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/OleehyO/latex-formulas/tree/main/cleaned_formulas)`latex-formulas` and extracted the `latex_formula` column to build a text-only corpus. This gives me 552,339 distinct equations.

Reviewer: Maybe a missing space after the link?

### Equations from ArXiv
For the arXiv part of the evaluation, I built a corpus by querying the cs.RO (robotics) category for 2,989 papers, downloading their LaTeX source tarballs, and scanning all .tex files for math environments such as equation and align. Each extracted equation is stored as a JSONL record containing the arXiv ID, source file path, environment type, and raw LaTeX string. This gives me a realistic set of 42,896 in-the-wild equations.

## Components Implemented

> I tried my best to implement most of the components in the proposal but have to pivot on some of the festures. I summarize the components as follows:

Reviewer: Readers of this blog post won't know what you mean by "the proposal." You can either link to it, briefly explaining that you wrote a proposal with an initial guess at the features you'd implement, or re-summarize it here.

- **LLVM backend** that compiles LEL functions into executable code.
- **End-to-end evaluation framework** with:
  - generated C test drivers
  - compilation and execution via LLVM/Clang
  - correctness checking on two real corpora (robotics equations and HF LaTeX formulas).
### Partially achieved / simplified
- **Conditionals** are supported at the LEL level via the ternary operator (`cond ? then : else`), but are **not** directly parsed from LaTeX `\begin{cases} ... \end{cases}` blocks.
- **Recursive functions** are supported in the language and IR (we can emit recursive LLVM functions), but are treated as **unsupported** in the evaluation pipeline to avoid non-terminating tests (no end-to-end recursion results).
- **Argument inference from the RHS** (collecting free variables as parameters) from the original proposal was **dropped** in favor of explicit function headers of the form `name(args) = expr` or `name = expr`.
### Minor type change
- The implementation uses a single `double` type for all parameters and return values, instead of the integer type originally mentioned in the proposal.

## Implementation Details
### MiTeX-based normalization

> Raw LaTeX equations from both corpora are first normalized using MiTeX. I treat each equation as a tiny standalone LaTeX document by wrapping it in a minimal preamble `(\documentclass{article}, \usepackage{amsmath})` and placing the equation in a display math environment. For each such document, I call the mitex compile CLI to produce a Typst source file. I then apply a simple line-based heuristic to extract the first non-directive line that looks like math content and store it as a typst_equation string in JSONL. This step standardizes a wide variety of LaTeX syntaxes into a more regular, MiTeX-normalized format while preserving the symbolic structure (identifiers, operators, parentheses). Only equations where MiTeX successfully returns Typst are passed on to the LEL front-end.

Reviewer: Is `mitex compile` supposed to be typeset as code?

> Raw LaTeX equations from both corpora are first normalized using MiTeX. I treat each equation as a tiny standalone LaTeX document by wrapping it in a minimal preamble `(\documentclass{article}, \usepackage{amsmath})` and placing the equation in a display math environment. For each such document, I call the mitex compile CLI to produce a Typst source file. I then apply a simple line-based heuristic to extract the first non-directive line that looks like math content and store it as a typst_equation string in JSONL. This step standardizes a wide variety of LaTeX syntaxes into a more regular, MiTeX-normalized format while preserving the symbolic structure (identifiers, operators, parentheses). Only equations where MiTeX successfully returns Typst are passed on to the LEL front-end.

Reviewer: I'm a little confused about the output format of this step. What exactly does this mechanism produce? Is it a text file? In some sort of MiTeX-specific text format? Or is it some kind of massaged code that is still in LaTeX syntax? Or maybe Typst syntax? Being specific about the inputs and outputs of each step will make your implementation clearer.

If the output is LaTeX or Typst, can you give an example of what kinds of things were normalized away? Even one example of the "bad/messy LaTeX input" and "cleaned-up/parseable Typst output" would help clarify.

# Evaluation
I evaluate LEL as a compiler rather than just a parser: for every accepted equation I generate LLVM IR, compile it with llc/clang, and link it against an auto-generated C test driver that calls the function on a small grid of inputs and checks the result against a Python reference evaluator over the same AST (within a fixed floating-point tolerance). 

> I evaluated on two aspests. First, the performance (speed). 

Reviewer: aspests -> aspects

> And second, the correctness.

Reviewer: Seems odd to have a paragraph break between these two sentences?

I run this pipeline on three corpora: (1) a tiny hand-written suite of 24 LEL functions, where all 22 non-recursive functions pass end-to-end; (2) a large sample from the Hugging Face latex-formulas dataset, where 360 MiTeX-normalized equations match the LEL shape and 119 of them pass the full pipeline; and (3) an arXiv robotics corpus, where 33 equations match the LEL subset and 9 compile and validate successfully. In all cases, failures are classified as parse errors, runtime errors in the reference semantics (e.g., division by zero or unknown symbols), or unsupported recursion.

In this section, I will first summary the overall result, and then dive deeper into the result on each dataset, and finally analyze the failure mode.
## Result overview

> ### Correstness

Reviewer: Correctness

| Corpus                     | Raw equations | MiTeX OK → Typst | LEL-parsable | End-to-end OK |
|----------------------------|--------------:|-----------------:|-------------:|--------------:|
| Hand-written test suite    |            24 |               24 |           22 |           22  |
| `latex-formulas`  |       552,339 |          506,900 |          360 |          119  |
| arXiv|        42,896 |           29,356 |           33 |            9  |
### Speed

> For functions that make it through parsing and reference evaluation, I also measure performance by timing the entire pipeline, from normalization and parsing through LLVM codegen, clang compilation, and execution of the test binary. On a M4 MacBook Pro laptop with 24 GB RAM running the Sequoia 15.6.1, processing 345 such functions takes 18.851 seconds total, for an average of about 54.6 ms per function, with a median of 0.1 ms and a maximum of ~512 ms. 

Reviewer: This is a cool outcome of the performance evaluation, even if performance was not exactly a top priority for this project.

### On the Hugging face latex-formulas dataset 
On the large latex-formulas corpus (HuggingFace), 506,900 (about 92%) are successfully normalized by MiTeX into Typst math. 360 matched the LEL parser and are evaluated. Out of these, 119 (33%) functions passed, 226 failed with runtime_error, and 15 were marked unsupported due to explicit recursion (e.g., f(a) = f(alpha) + …, T(x) = T(-x)). The runtime_error cases are almost entirely due to my reference evaluator’s strict handling of free symbols: many equations involve undeclared constants, matrix/vector symbols, or built-in functions (e.g., x = f(x)), and the evaluator reports these as unknown variable rather than assuming numeric values. In contrast, the 119 successful cases are the clean subset where all identifiers can be interpreted purely as scalar parameters and local variables under my simple semantics. 

### On the ArXiv dataset

> On the arXiv robotics corpus, MiTeX successfully produced normalized Typst math for 29,356 equations. Out of these, only 33 equations (~0.1%) matched the very restrictive LEL shape and were accepted by the LEL parser. When I ran the end-to-end evaluation pipeline on these 33 functions, 9 passed (27%) and 24 were reported as runtime_error. The failures were not due to codegen bugs but to the reference evaluator’s deliberately conservative treatment of free symbols: many equations use undeclared constants or matrix-valued symbols (e.g., Ax = b, R = det(M) - k(trace(M))^2), which the evaluator flags as "unknown variable" rather than silently treating them as numeric parameters. On real papers, the LEL compiler can successfully compile and run a small handful of clean scalar equations, while most extracted equations either fall outside the LEL subset or rely on ambient symbols (vectors, matrices, constants) that are not modeled in my current semantics. 

Reviewer: Consider using math mode or just `code backticks` to make these bits look less weird in the final rendered page:

> Ax = b, R = det(M) - k(trace(M))^2

# Hardest part
The hardest part of this project was not the LLVM backend, but making the front-end survive real LaTeX in the wild. In theory, LEL only needs a tiny, clean subset of math (function headers + arithmetic + simple conditionals). In practice, every step of getting from a paper's equation to that nice little subset was painful: MiTeX normalization introduces its own macros (mitexsqrt, mitexarray, lr(...)), arXiv sources are full of custom commands, arrays, matrices, integrals, and decorated identifiers, and Typst's output format doesn't line up neatly with my very simple identifier and expression grammar. A huge amount of time went into massaging and filtering equations, chasing down weird corner cases, and deciding whether to extend the grammar or just reject a construct. I have to make some pivots against the original proposal but I managed to comeup with a decent amount of featured and a thorough evaluation.

# Star?

> I think I deserve a star for the implementation and evaluation.

Reviewer: Because this blog post is for external consumption, you can leave this class-specific discussion out. :)

# GenAI usage
I used ChatGPT and Copilot throughout this project. 
I used GPT to:
- Brainstorm and outline what are the steps toward finishing this project
- Layoput a skeleton code
- Debug when there are issues
- Write scripts to do plotting and timing
- Refine the writing of the writeup
- Write the readme for the code repo
  
I used Copilot to:

> - Completet the code with the inline plugin

Reviewer: "Completet"
